---
layout: post
title: NFL Tracking Data Project
date: 2025-05-03 14:24:00
description: A first post...
tags: 
categories: 
chart:
  plotly: true
---

In Spring 2024, I worked on a project using NFL player tracking data. Along the way, [Professor Greg Matthews](https://statsinthewild.com/) provided valuable feedback to clean up the project. The prior winter, the Kaggle NFL Big Data Bowl competition was focused on stopping the run. Tracking for every player in every play of every game of the first nine weeks of the 2022 NFL season was provided. I was late to the party and did not submit anything, but here is my project.

I was inspired by the [submission](https://www.kaggle.com/code/tindata/momentum-based-fractional-tackles) and subsequent paper {% cite fractionalTackles %} by a CMU team made up of Quang Nguyen, Ruitong Jiang, Meg Ellingwood, and Ron Yurko on fractional tackles. A common measure for a defender's ability is tackles, which are assigned at the end of plays if a defender is deemed to have tackled the ball carrier. If multiple players were involved, they are each assigned half of a tackle. However, this is a very subjective measure. To improve this, they propose a method for assigning fractional tackle credit that is model-free. At each frame, a contact window is calculated as the 1.5-yard bubble around the ball carried. The carrier's momentum towards the endzone is what the defenders are credited with decreasing, and credit is distributed equally across frames of contact windows, and divvied up within a frame evenly between the defenders with a contact opportunity in the window.

To build on this, I wanted to score players based on yards and points saved rather than momentum decreased. Although it captures a similar notion, I think that putting it in terms of yards and points provides a more intuitive metric by which to evaluate players. To build intuition on the value of both of these metrics, see the GIF below. In week 2 of the 2022 season, the Jaguars thrashed the Colts 24-0. In the fourth quarter, Jonathan Taylor broke off a run for about 25 yards. The left video shows the play, and the right is the play through tracking data. In the play, number 26 is credited with making the tackle. However, the most valuable defender on the play was clearly number two, who functioned as a speed bump, slowing down Taylor enough for the Jaguars defenders to catch up and make a play. With typical tackle tallying metrics, 2 would not have gotten credit.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include video.liquid path="assets/video/stoppingTheRun.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include video.liquid path="assets/video/playTrackingStoppingTheRun.mp4" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" controls=true %}
    </div>
</div>



